[Add] `TimmWrapper` (#2600)
huggingface/blog: timmwrapper.md

Reviewer: how about rename to timm-transformers ?

Author: Done!

[`timm` library](https://huggingface.co/models?library=timm&sort=trending) using
the familiar 🤗 `transformers` ecosystem?

Enter the [`TimmWrapper`](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/main/en/model_doc/timm_wrapper)—a simple,
yet powerful tool that unlocks this potential.

In this post, we’ll cover:
- How the timm integration works and why it’s a game-changer.
- How to integrate `timm` models with 🤗 `transformers`.
- Practical examples: pipelines, quantization, fine-tuning, and more.

> [!NOTE]
> To follow along with this blog post, install the latest version of `transformers` and `timm` by running:
> ```bash
> pip install -Uq transformers timm
> ```

> [!NOTE]  
> Check out the full repository for all code examples and notebooks:
> 🔗 [TimmWrapper Examples](https://github.com/ariG23498/timmwrapper-examples)  

## What is timm?

The [PyTorch Image Models (`timm`) library](https://huggingface.co/docs/timm/en/index)
offers a rich collection of state-of-the-art computer vision models,
along with useful layers, utilities, optimizers, and data augmentations.
With more than 32K GitHub stars, more than 200K daily downloads at the time of writing,

> it’s a go-to resource for image classification, object detection, segmentation, and more.

Reviewer 2: While `timm` offers state-of-the-art image classification models that can be used as building blocks for object detection and segmentation, I'm not sure if this sounds correct since, as far as I know, `timm` itself does not have object detection/segmentation models yet.

Author: Do you think I should change the sentence to better communicate this point? `timm` is widely used for a lot of tasks other than image classification, due to the backbones. I am not sure how to place this sentiment better though.

Do you have something in mind?

Reviewer 2: Agree, maybe it's just my perception, let's see.

Reviewer 3: @ariG23498 What about `it's a go-to resource for image classification and feature extraction for object detection, segmentation, image search, and other downstream tasks.`

including many mobile-friendly and efficient models not available in transformers.

The `timm` integration bridges this gap, bringing the best of both worlds:
- ✅ **Pipeline API Support**: Easily plug any `timm` model into the high-level `transformers` pipeline for streamlined inference.
- 🧩 **Compatibility with Auto Classes**: While `timm` models aren’t natively compatible with `transformers`, the integration makes them work seamlessly with the `Auto` classes API.
- ⚡ **Quick Quantization**: With just ~5 lines of code, you can quantize **any** `timm` model for efficient inference.
- 🎯 **Fine-Tuning with Trainer API**: Fine-tune `timm` models using the `Trainer` API and even integrate with adapters like low rank adaptation (LoRA).
- 🚀 **Torch Compile for Speed**: Leverage `torch.compile` to optimize inference time.

## Pipeline API: Using timm Models for Image Classification

One of the standout features of the `timm` integration is that it allows you to leverage the 🤗 **`pipeline` API**.
The **`pipeline` API** abstracts away a lot of complexity, making it easy to load a pre-trained model,
perform inference, and view results with a few lines of code.

> Let’s see how to use a transformers pipeline with the *MobileNetV4* (not available in `transformers`) model from `timm`:

Reviewer 2: The phrase "not available in `transformers`" sounds contradictory to me. It might be better to say something like "became available in `transformers` with `timm`", WDYT?

Author: I do want to emphasise that MobileNetV4 is not available in the `transformers` repository. The wrapper makes it available, and there are many such models.

Can we adjust the statement to "does not have a transformers implementation, but now has became available in transformers with timm". I think this statement drives the point home, what do you think?

Reviewer 2: Sounds good

```python
from transformers import pipeline
import requests

# Load the image classification pipeline with a timm model
image_classifier = pipeline(model="timm/mobilenetv4_conv_medium.e500_r256_in1k")

# URL of the image to classify
url = "https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/timm/cat.jpg"

# Perform inference
outputs = image_classifier(url)

# Print the results
for output in outputs:
    print(f"Label: {output['label'] :20} Score: {output['score'] :0.2f}")
```

**Outputs**:

```bash
Device set to use cpu
Label: tabby, tabby cat     Score: 0.69
Label: tiger cat            Score: 0.21
Label: Egyptian cat         Score: 0.02
Label: bee                  Score: 0.00
Label: marmoset             Score: 0.00
```

## Gradio Integration: Building a Food Classifier Demo 🍣  

Want to quickly create an interactive web app for image classification? **Gradio** makes it simple

> to build a user-friendly interface with minimal code. Let's combine **Gradio** with the `pipeline` API

Reviewer 2: ❤️

config = PeftConfig.from_pretrained(repo_name)

model = AutoModelForImageClassification.from_pretrained(
    config.base_model_name_or_path,
    label2id=label2id,
    num_labels=num_labels,
    id2label=id2label,
    ignore_mismatched_sizes=True,
)
inference_model = PeftModel.from_pretrained(model, repo_name)

# Make prediction with the model
```

![image of sushi with prediction from a fine tuned model](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/timmwrapper/prediction-food.png)

## Torch Compile: Instant Speedup 🚀  

With **`torch.compile`** in PyTorch 2.0, you can achieve **faster inference** by compiling your model
with just one line of code. The `timm` integration is fully compatible with `torch.compile`.
Here's a quick benchmark to compare inference time with and without `torch.compile` using the `TimmWrapper`.

```python
# Load the model and input
model = TimmWrapperForImageClassification.from_pretrained(checkpoint).to(device)
processed_input = image_processor(image, return_tensors="pt").to(device)

# Benchmark function
def run_benchmark(model, input_data, runs=300):
    model.eval()
    with torch.no_grad():

>         times = [time.time() - time.time() for _ in range(runs)]
>         for i in range(runs):
>             start = time.time()
>             _ = model(**input_data)
>             times[i] = time.time() - start
>     return sum(times) / runs

Reviewer 2: This way, it looks more pythonic

```suggestion
        times = []
        for i in range(runs):
            start = time.time()
            _ = model(**input_data)
            times.append(time.time() - start)
    return sum(times) / runs
```

Reviewer 2: Do we need a warm-up, or is it intended to be omitted?

Author: This is intended to be omitted. The end to end notebooks are all [in this repository](https://github.com/ariG23498/timm-wrapper-examples).

![image of sushi with prediction from a fine tuned model](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/timmwrapper/prediction-food.png)

## Torch Compile: Instant Speedup 🚀  

With **`torch.compile`** in PyTorch 2.0, you can achieve **faster inference** by compiling your model
with just one line of code. The `timm` integration is fully compatible with `torch.compile`.
Here's a quick benchmark to compare inference time with and without `torch.compile` using the `TimmWrapper`.

```python
# Load the model and input
model = TimmWrapperForImageClassification.from_pretrained(checkpoint).to(device)
processed_input = image_processor(image, return_tensors="pt").to(device)

# Benchmark function
def run_benchmark(model, input_data, runs=300):
    model.eval()
    with torch.no_grad():
        times = []
        for i in range(runs):
            start = time.time()
            _ = model(**input_data)
            times.append(time.time() - start)
    return sum(times) / runs

# Run benchmarks
time_no_compile = run_benchmark(model, processed_input)
compiled_model = torch.compile(model).to(device)
time_compile = run_benchmark(compiled_model, processed_input)

> 

Reviewer 3: FWIW This benchmark isn't technically correct if it's using an accelerator. 

A synchronize call is needed after the model forward ... e.g. for cuda `torch.cuda.synchronize(device=device)`

Otherwise it's just timing the asynchronous dispatch. Also `time.perf_counter()` is a bit better to use here.

Author: That is a great catch!

I have made the following changes, does it make sense now?
```py
def run_benchmark(model, input_data, warmup_runs=5, benchmark_runs=300):
    # Warm-up phase
    model.eval()
    with torch.no_grad():
        for _ in range(warmup_runs):
            _ = model(**input_data)

    # Benchmark phase
    times = []
    with torch.no_grad():
        for _ in range(benchmark_runs):
            start_time = time.perf_counter()
            _ = model(**input_data)
            if device.type == "cuda":
                torch.cuda.synchronize(device=device)  # Ensure synchronization for CUDA
            times.append(time.perf_counter() - start_time)

    avg_time = sum(times) / benchmark_runs
    return avg_time
```

Reviewer 3: @ariG23498 yup, looks good!

[`timm` library](https://huggingface.co/models?library=timm&sort=trending) using
the familiar 🤗 `transformers` ecosystem?

Enter the [`TimmWrapper`](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/main/en/model_doc/timm_wrapper)—a simple,
yet powerful tool that unlocks this potential.

In this post, we’ll cover:
- How the timm integration works and why it’s a game-changer.
- How to integrate `timm` models with 🤗 `transformers`.
- Practical examples: pipelines, quantization, fine-tuning, and more.

> [!NOTE]
> To follow along with this blog post, install the latest version of `transformers` and `timm` by running:
> ```bash
> pip install -Uq transformers timm
> ```

> [!NOTE]  
> Check out the full repository for all code examples and notebooks:
> 🔗 [TimmWrapper Examples](https://github.com/ariG23498/timmwrapper-examples)  

Also, worth mentioning, and one of Ross' (creator of `timm`) favourite features, this integration maintains
full 'round-trip' compatibility. Namely, using the wrapper one can fine-tune a timm model on a new
dataset using `transformer`'s `Trainer`, publish the resulting model to the Hugging Face hub,

> and then load the fine-tuned model in `timm` again using `timm.create_model('hf-hub:my_org/my_fine_tuned_model', pretrained=True)`.

Reviewer: Not sure this is the best place for this, may not be too visible after the notes. What do you think about adding it as an additional bullet point to the list above?

Author: I have moved this to a later section (which is dedicated to this point)

## What is timm?

The [PyTorch Image Models (`timm`) library](https://huggingface.co/docs/timm/en/index)
offers a rich collection of state-of-the-art computer vision models,
along with useful layers, utilities, optimizers, and data augmentations.

> With more than 32K GitHub stars, more than 200K daily downloads at the time of writing,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With more than 32K GitHub stars and more than 200K daily downloads at the time of writing,
```

it's a go-to resource for image classification and feature extraction for object detection,
segmentation, image search, and other downstream tasks.

With pre-trained models covering a wide range of architectures, `timm` simplifies the workflow for
computer vision practitioners.

> ## Why Use the TimmWrapper?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Why Use the timm integration?
```

While 🤗 `transformers` supports several vision models, `timm` offers an even broader collection,
including many mobile-friendly and efficient models not available in transformers.

The `timm` integration bridges this gap, bringing the best of both worlds:
- ✅ **Pipeline API Support**: Easily plug any `timm` model into the high-level `transformers` pipeline for streamlined inference.
- 🧩 **Compatibility with Auto Classes**: While `timm` models aren’t natively compatible with `transformers`, the integration makes them work seamlessly with the `Auto` classes API.
- ⚡ **Quick Quantization**: With just ~5 lines of code, you can quantize **any** `timm` model for efficient inference.
- 🎯 **Fine-Tuning with Trainer API**: Fine-tune `timm` models using the `Trainer` API and even integrate with adapters like low rank adaptation (LoRA).

> - 🚀 **Torch Compile for Speed**: Leverage `torch.compile` to optimize inference time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 🔁 **Round trip to timm**: Use fine-tuned models back in `timm`.
- 🚀 **Torch Compile for Speed**: Leverage `torch.compile` to optimize inference time.
```

## Pipeline API: Using timm Models for Image Classification

One of the standout features of the `timm` integration is that it allows you to leverage the 🤗 **`pipeline` API**.
The **`pipeline` API** abstracts away a lot of complexity, making it easy to load a pre-trained model,
perform inference, and view results with a few lines of code.

> Let's see how to use a transformers pipeline with the *MobileNetV4* (does not have a `transformers` implementation,
> but now has became available in `transformers` with `timm`) model from `timm`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's see how to use a transformers pipeline with the *MobileNetV4*. This architecture does not have a native `transformers` implementation, but can be easily used from `timm`:
```

quantization_config = BitsAndBytesConfig(load_in_8bit=True)
checkpoint = "timm/vit_base_patch16_224.augreg2_in21k_ft_in1k"

model = TimmWrapperForImageClassification.from_pretrained(checkpoint).to("cuda")
model_8bit = TimmWrapperForImageClassification.from_pretrained(
    checkpoint,
    quantization_config=quantization_config,
    low_cpu_mem_usage=True,
)
```

```python
original_footprint = model.get_memory_footprint()
quantized_footprint = model_8bit.get_memory_footprint()

print(f"Original model size: {original_footprint / 1e6:.2f} MB")
print(f"Quantized model size: {quantized_footprint / 1e6:.2f} MB")
print(f"Reduction: {(original_footprint - quantized_footprint) / original_footprint * 100:.2f}%")
```

**Output:**  
```
Original model size: 346.27 MB  
Quantized model size: 88.20 MB  
Reduction: 74.53%  
``` 

Quantized models perform **almost identically** to full-precision models during inference:

| **Model**         | **Label**                | **Accuracy** |
|-------------------|-------------------------|-----------|
| Original Model    | remote control, remote   | 0.35%     |
| Quantized Model   | remote control, remote   | 0.33%     |

> ## Supervised Fine-Tuning with `TimmWrapper`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Supervised Fine-Tuning of `timm` models
```

[LoRA with the **PEFT** library](https://huggingface.co/docs/peft/main/en/conceptual_guides/lora).

Here’s how you can set it up:

```python
from peft import LoraConfig, get_peft_model

model = AutoModelForImageClassification.from_pretrained(checkpoint, num_labels=num_labels)
lora_config = LoraConfig(
    r=16,
    lora_alpha=16,
    target_modules=["qkv"],
    lora_dropout=0.1,
    bias="none",
    modules_to_save=["head"],
)

# Wrap the model with PEFT
lora_model = get_peft_model(model, lora_config)

lora_model.print_trainable_parameters()
```

**Trainable Parameters with LoRA:**  
```bash
trainable params: 667,493 || all params: 86,543,818 || trainable%: 0.77%
```

**Model Example:**  
LoRA Fine-Tuned ViT on **Food-101**: [**`vit_base_patch16_224.augreg2_in21k_ft_in1k.lora_ft_food101`**](https://huggingface.co/ariG23498/vit_base_patch16_224.augreg2_in21k_ft_in1k.lora_ft_food101)

LoRA is just one example of efficient adapter-based fine-tuning methods you can apply to `timm` models.
The integration of `timm` with the 🤗 ecosystem opens up a wide variety of **parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT)** techniques,
allowing you to choose the method that best fits your use case.

> ### Inference with LoRA Fine-Tuned Model 

Reviewer: I think the lora fine-tunes cannot be used back in `timm`, can they?

Once the model is LoRA fine-tuned, we only push the adapter weights to the Hugging Face Hub. This section helps
you to download the adapter weights, merge the adapter weights with the base model, and then perform inference.

```python
from peft import PeftModel, PeftConfig

repo_name = "ariG23498/vit_base_patch16_224.augreg2_in21k_ft_in1k.lora_ft_food101"
config = PeftConfig.from_pretrained(repo_name)

model = AutoModelForImageClassification.from_pretrained(
    config.base_model_name_or_path,
    label2id=label2id,
    num_labels=num_labels,
    id2label=id2label,
    ignore_mismatched_sizes=True,
)
inference_model = PeftModel.from_pretrained(model, repo_name)

# Make prediction with the model
```

![image of sushi with prediction from a fine tuned model](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/timmwrapper/prediction-food.png)

> ## Torch Compile: Instant Speedup 🚀  

Reviewer: I'd add a short section about inference with timm if we can

Author: Done!

processed_input = image_processor(image, return_tensors="pt").to(device)

# Benchmark function
def run_benchmark(model, input_data, warmup_runs=5, benchmark_runs=300):
    # Warm-up phase
    model.eval()
    with torch.no_grad():
        for _ in range(warmup_runs):
            _ = model(**input_data)

    # Benchmark phase
    times = []
    with torch.no_grad():
        for _ in range(benchmark_runs):
            start_time = time.perf_counter()
            _ = model(**input_data)
            if device.type == "cuda":
                torch.cuda.synchronize(device=device)  # Ensure synchronization for CUDA
            times.append(time.perf_counter() - start_time)

    avg_time = sum(times) / benchmark_runs
    return avg_time

# Run benchmarks
time_no_compile = run_benchmark(model, processed_input)
compiled_model = torch.compile(model).to(device)
time_compile = run_benchmark(compiled_model, processed_input)

# Results
print(f"Without torch.compile: {time_no_compile:.4f} s")
print(f"With torch.compile: {time_compile:.4f} s")
```

![compile timing](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/timmwrapper/compile.png)

## Wrapping Up

> `timm` integrated into the Hugging Face ecosystem opens new doors for leveraging state-of-the-art vision models

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`timm`'s integration with transformers opens new doors for leveraging state-of-the-art vision models
```

with minimal effort. Whether you're looking to fine-tune, quantize, or simply run inference, this
integration provides a unified API to streamline your workflow.

> By combining timm's model repository with the extensive ecosystem of transformers, you get the best
> of both worlds. Start exploring today and unlock new possibilities in computer vision!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Start exploring today and unlock new possibilities in computer vision!
```

A bit repetitive with the above, maybe?
